newsNews Commentary By Sharon Grigsby 6:00 AM on Mar 10, 2023 CST In the awful moment a speeding driver — allegedly fueled by alcohol — crashed into a family stopped at a red light in front of the Dallas Arboretum, people in the area were certain a bomb had exploded on Garland Road.
The violent collision sent the victims’ SUV into a roll that ended with the vehicle lodged upside down — and so crumpled witnesses couldn’t imagine any of its four occupants surviving.
By some miracle, they did.
But the two women in the back seat suffered serious injuries and one remains hospitalized.
The family has requested privacy as its members do their best to get through what are terribly difficult days.
Behind the wheel of the speeding Honda, which witnesses say never slowed before impact, was 22-year-old Arianna Alvarez.
Her only passenger, according to the probable cause affidavit, was a partially empty bottle of Don Julio tequila in the center console.
Alvarez, who at last report remained hospitalized in critical condition, faces two counts of intoxication assault with serious bodily injury.
The affidavit says her initial blood alcohol test came back positive.
“It’s one of those collisions you see and think, ‘Oh my god, how did something that violent happen on this street,’” East Dallas resident Hooman Shamsa told me.
“There’s no describing how mangled the SUV was.” The wreck, which occurred about 8:30 p.m. March 4, reignited the speeding, racing and reckless driving concerns of neighbors and users of the Garland Road-Grand Avenue stretch of State Highway 78 between I-30 and I-635.
They understandably want to know what the city can do to calm traffic on this six-lane roadway.
Theirs is not a unique clamor.
You hear it from neighbors and drivers all over Dallas as our thoroughfares increasingly have become speedways — both to those engaged in reckless driving and those who simply think their schedule trumps the posted 40 mph limit.
In this case of a high-speed driver seemingly too impaired to see a red light and a car at a dead-stop until she plowed into it, even the best road engineering and warning signs likely wouldn’t have deterred tragedy.
But the incident has prompted council member Paula Blackmon, whose District 9 includes Garland Road, to renew her call for the city’s Department of Transportation to work with the Texas Department of Transportation to move it from the state’s inventory to city control.
Garland Road, which runs to the north from the “3G” intersection at Gaston Road, and Grand Avenue, which runs from the 3G to the south, are part of State Highway 78.
That means the city has far less control to institute traffic-calming measures.
Blackmon says TxDOT’s mission is very different from that of the city and focuses on “how to get as fast as you can between Point A and Point B.” “It’s crazy to have a six-lane highway running through the area,” she told me.
“We need to take it to make it fit our communities and businesses that are along that roadway.” TxDOT spokesman Tony Hartzel told me in response: “If the city is interested in taking over this road, we are ready to talk.” He also said safety is TxDOT’s top priority.
Several years ago, when Dallas considered taking over the Grand Avenue piece of Highway 78, TxDOT also was agreeable.
Eventually, the city decided against moving forward with the idea.
When TxDOT hands over roads, Hartzel said, it typically first does a full maintenance job — redoing the concrete, putting down a new overlay and repairing curbs and gutters.
Finding the right plan for the 7-mile Garland-Grand stretch, which runs from I-30 to LBJ Freeway, is complicated by the fact the two pieces of roadway are so different in design, neighborhoods and needs.
But they both battle the same foe: speeders and reckless drivers.
TxDOT will review the March 4 wreck, as it does many serious accidents, to determine if the highway contributed in any way, Hartzel said.
The agency also will consult a speed study to see if any adjustments are needed.
State crash reports from the last five years show six fatal accidents occurred on the Garland Road segment from Gaston to Peavy roads, and 12 led to serious injuries.
Three fatal accidents and 17 involving serious injuries were recorded since 2018 on the Grand Avenue piece from I-30 to Gaston.
Checking with Dallas police on speeding tickets from I-30 to LBJ, I learned 93 citations were issued in the last year through the department’s e-ticket devices.
Cops assigned to the traffic unit rely on the digital system, but most patrol officers still use the traditional paper citations.
The department doesn’t keep totals for speeding tickets issued on paper, so it couldn’t say how many more were written.
District 2 council member Jesse Moreno and District 14′s Paul Ridley, who represent the areas along Grand Avenue, are as passionate as Blackmon about wanting to see major improvements, including discussion of Garland-Grand going into the city’s portfolio.
Both pointed to a just-launched corridor study of the Grand Avenue section, funded by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, as an opportunity to get data-driven solutions.
Ridley and Moreno noted nagging problems along Grand, much of which is split by a large green space: vehicles going the wrong way and cars crashing into yards and park space.
Most concerning to them and nearby residents, such as Hooman Shamsa, is the lack of safe accessibility to the parks and schools on either side of the road.
“This study, with its field work and community input, should help us know how best to invest money in all the needed traffic-calming measures,” Ridley said.
Shamsa, who has been a longtime proponent of the corridor study, said the many accidents on Grand are caused by “a road that is confusing to motorists and very accommodating for those who want to take advantage of it through speeding.” The city’s Department of Transportation director, Gus Khankarli, also emphasized that the new study is vital to deciding next steps.
He is aware of the council members’ desire for Garland-Grand to go into the city’s portfolio, but said “it’s way too preliminary for the city to engage deeper in those discussions.” Khankarli, who worked at TxDOT for 24 years and has led the city’s transportation office since 2021, said it’s difficult to retrofit any roadway conceived decades ago as a highway to make it work for today’s Dallas.
He pointed to additional red-light signals on Garland Road, done in conjunction with the state transportation department, as traffic-calming improvements.
The 3G intersection, which TxDOT says is on track to be completed by the fall, includes an additional traffic light for that area and, for the first time, will accommodate bike and pedestrian access.
Khankarli has a lot of faith in the Vision Zero road safety blueprint approved by the City Council in June to provide a multiyear, multiagency framework to look at traffic incidents and suggest the best solutions.
He also said a big part of Vision Zero is educating the public to slow down and comply with traffic laws.
For the many of us who regularly get our doors blown off as we try to obey the rules of the road, good luck with that.
Sharon Grigsby.
As the DMN City Columnist and a fourth-generation Texan, I'm focused on all things Dallas.
I made what I expected to be a short career stopover here in 1980 and, this many years later, I'm still working to make Dallas a better city for all its residents.
You'll also find me raising my voice on behalf of mental health care and women's issues.
Get the latest breaking news from North Texas and beyond.
By signing up you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy Stand with us in our mission to discover and uncover the story of North Texas
